# Chapter 3
## The Doctype
```html
<!DOCTYPE html
         PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
         "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
```
The doctype is the solution to the problem of the improvement of the standards and the upcoming problems in older browser, so they implemented this to make older broser to run their versions an newest to apply the new features.
The posible modes of the browser are the next ones.
- Quirks Mode
In the Quirks mode, browsers violate contemporary Web format specifications in order to avoid “breaking” pages authored according to practices that were prevalent in the late 1990s.
- Standards Mode
In the Standards mode, browsers try to give conforming documents the specification-wise correct treatment to the extent implemented in a particular browser. HTML5 calls this mode the “no quirks mode.”
- Almost Standards Mode
Firefox, Safari, Chrome, Opera (since 7.5) and IE8 also have a mode known as “Almost Standards mode,” that implements the vertical sizing of table cells traditionally and not rigorously according to the CSS2 specification. HTML5 calls this mode the “limited quirks mode.”

## The Root
HTML is like a tree, all code lines come from other one like branches, and in the base of all <html>.
Ex.
``` html
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en">
```
The two attributes here, lang and xml:lang, both define the language of this HTML page.
## The head
The first branch is usually the head.
The <head> element itself is rather boring, and it hasn’t changed in any interesting way in HTML5. The good stuff is what’s inside the <head> element.
Ex.
```html
<head>
     <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
     <title>My Weblog</title>
     <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style-original.css" />
     <link rel="alternate" type="application/atom+xml"
                    title="My Weblog feed"
                          href="/feed/" />
     <link rel="search" type="application/opensearchdescription+xml"
                        title="My Weblog search"
                        href="opensearch.xml"  />
     <link rel="shortcut icon" href="/favicon.ico" />
</head>
 ```
## Character Encoding
Computers don’t deal in characters and symbols; they deal in bits and bytes. Every piece of text you’ve ever seen on a computer screen is actually stored in a particular character encoding. There are hundreds of different character encodings, some optimized for particular languages like Russian or Chinese or English.
The encoding can be visible in a line like this one
```html
Content-Type: text/html; charset="utf-8"
```
Where utf-8 is the encoding.
## Link Relations
Regular links (<a href>) simply point to another page. Link relations are a way to explain why you’re pointing to another page. They finish the sentence “I’m pointing to this other page because...”
- ...it’s a stylesheet containing CSS rules that your browser should apply to this document.
- ...it’s a feed that contains the same content as this page, but in a standard subscribable format.
- ...it’s a translation of this page into another language.
- ...it’s the same content as this page, but in PDF format.
- ...it’s the next chapter of an online book of which this page is also a part.

The links relations can be broken in two categories:
1. Links to external resources are links to resources that are to be used to augment the current document.
2. Hyperlink links are links to other documents.

## Rel=Stylesheet
This is the most frequently used link relation in the world (literally). <link rel="stylesheet"> is for pointing to CSS rules that are stored in a separate file. One small optimization you can make in HTML5 is to drop the type attribute.
Ex.
```hmtl
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style-original.css" type="text/css" />
```
## Rel=Alternate
This link relation is also quite common. <link rel="alternate">, combined with either the RSS or Atom media type in the type attribute, enables something called “feed autodiscovery.” It allows syndicated feed readers (like Google Reader) to discover that a site has a news feed of the latest articles.
Ex.
```html
    <link rel="alternate"
       type="application/atom+xml"
       title="My Weblog feed"
       href="/feed/" />
```
## Other Link Relations
- rel="author"
- rel="start"
- rel="prev"
- rel="next"
- rel="up"
- rel="license"
- rel="nofollow"
- rel="noreferrer"
- rel="prefetch"
- rel="search"

## New Semantic Elements in HTML5
- <section></section>
The section element represents a generic document or application section.
- <nav></nav>
The nav element represents a section of a page that links to other pages or to parts within the page: a section with navigation links. 
- <article></article>
The article element represents a component of a page that consists of a self-contained composition in a document, page, application, or site and that is intended to be independently distributable or reusable
- <aside></aside>
The aside element represents a section of a page that consists of content that is tangentially related to the content around the aside element, and which could be considered separate from that content.
- <hgroup></hgroup>
The hgroup element represents the heading of a section.
- <header></header>
The header element represents a group of introductory or navigational aids.
- <footer></footer>
The footer element represents a footer for its nearest ancestor sectioning content or sectioning root element.
- <time></time>
The time element represents either a time on a 24 hour clock, or a precise date in the proleptic Gregorian calendar, optionally with a time and a time-zone offset.
- <mark></mark>
The mark element represents a run of text in one document marked or highlighted for reference purposes.
## 

## How Browser Handle Unknown Elements
Every browser has a master list of HTML elements that it supports. For example, Mozilla Firefox’s list is stored in nsElementTable.cpp. Elements not in this list are treated as “unknown elements.” There are two fundamental problems with unknown elements:

1. **How should the element be styled?** By default, <p> has spacing on the top and bottom, <blockquote> is indented with a left margin, and <h1> is displayed in a larger font. But what default styles should be applied to unknown elements?
2. **What should the element’s DOM look like?** Mozilla’s nsElementTable.cpp includes information about what kinds of other elements each element can contain. If you include markup like <p><p>, the second paragraph element implicitly closes the first one, so the elements end up as siblings, not parent-and-child. But if you write <p><span>, the span does not close the paragraph, because Firefox knows that <p> is a block element that can contain the inline element <span>. So, the <span> ends up as a child of the <p> in the DOM.

The first question should be relatively simple to answer: don’t give any special styling to unknown elements. Just let them inherit whatever CSS properties are in effect wherever they appear on the page.

The second problem is the DOM that browsers create when they encounter unknown elements. Again, the most problematic browser is older versions of Internet Explorer (before version 9, which fixes this problem too). If IE 8 doesn’t explicitly recognize the element name, it will insert the element into the DOM as an empty node with no children. All the elements that you would expect to be direct children of the unknown element will actually be inserted as siblings instead.
## Headers
HTML5 defines a <header> element for this purpose. The HTML5 specification has real-world examples of using the <header> element.
Ex.
```html
 <header>
    <h1>My Weblog</h1>
    <p class="tagline">A lot of effort went into making this effortless.</p>
     …
</header>
```
Given this markup:
```html
<header>
     <hgroup>
    <h1>My Weblog</h1>
    <h2>A lot of effort went into making this effortless.</h2>
     </hgroup>
     …
</header>
…
<div class="entry">
     <h2>Travel day</h2>
 </div>
…
<div class="entry">
     <h2>I'm going to Prague!</h2>
</div>
```
This is the document outline that is created:

My Weblog (h1 of its hgroup)
   |
   +--Travel day (h2)
   |
   +--I'm going to Prague! (h2)
## Articles
The <article> HTML element represents a self-contained composition in a document, page, application, or site, which is intended to be independently distributable or reusable
Ex.
```html
<article>
     <header>
    <h1>A syndicated post</h1>
    </header>
     <p>Lorem ipsum blah blah…</p>
</article>
```
## Dates and Times
There are three parts to a <time> element:
- A machine-readable timestamp

```html
<time datetime="2009-10-22T13:59:47-04:00" pubdate>
    October 22, 2009 1:59pm EDT
</time>
```
- Human-readable text contenT
```html
<time datetime="2009-10-22">last Thursday</time>
```
- An optional pubdate flag
```html
<time datetime="2009-10-22" pubdate="pubdate">October 22, 2009</time>
```
## Navigation
One of the most important parts of any web site is the navigation bar.
 HTML5 provides a semantic way to mark up navigation sections: the <nav> element.
 Ex.
 ```html
<nav>
    <ul>
<li><a href="#">home</a></li>
<li><a href="#">blog</a></li>
<li><a href="#">gallery</a></li>
<li><a href="#">about</a></li>
    </ul>
</nav>
```
## Footers
The footers are the elements that displays in the lower part of the page, What’s appropriate to put in a <footer> element? A footer typically contains information about its section such as who wrote it, links to related documents, copyright data, and the like.
“Fat footers” are all the rage these days. Take a look at the footer on the W3C site. It contains three columns, labeled “Navigation,” “Contact W3C,” and “W3C Updates.” The markup looks like this, more or less:
```html
    <div id="w3c_footer">
      <div class="w3c_footer-nav">
        <h3>Navigation</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><a href="/">Home</a></li>
          <li><a href="/standards/">Standards</a></li>
          <li><a href="/participate/">Participate</a></li>
          <li><a href="/Consortium/membership">Membership</a></li>
          <li><a href="/Consortium/">About W3C</a></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="w3c_footer-nav">
        <h3>Contact W3C</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><a href="/Consortium/contact">Contact</a></li>
          <li><a href="/Help/">Help and FAQ</a></li>
          <li><a href="/Consortium/sup">Donate</a></li>
          <li><a href="/Consortium/siteindex">Site Map</a></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="w3c_footer-nav">
        <h3>W3C Updates</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><a href="http://twitter.com/W3C">Twitter</a></li>
          <li><a href="http://identi.ca/w3c">Identi.ca</a></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p class="copyright">Copyright © 2009 W3C</p>
    </div>
```